Welcome... to another episode of Shiloh Creek....Where the water runs slow, the friends look out for each other, and every story starts here — pondside — with me.
I'm Old Timber....The elephant elder....And today's story... is the morning the friends woke up to a steady grey rain... on the day they had been planning all week....And what the rain turned out to be... once they walked into it.
Today... I want to ask you something, my friends....Have you ever had a day...that wasn't the day you wanted?...Maybe the rain came when you wanted sun.....Maybe the thing you planned... didn't happen....What does it mean...to find good in a day you didn't pick?...Listen carefully....The answer is in the story.
Now... gather round, friends. Come close by the pond.
...Old Timber....Is this the rainy one?
Mm....Yes, Shelly....It is the rainy one....Settle in.
Now... settle in....Here we go.
Now, this was a wet grey morning,...the kind where the rain has settled in,...steady and even,...and you can tell by the sound of it on the leaves...that it isn't going anywhere for a while.
And the friends had been planning,...for almost a week,...a particular day at the creek....A swim in the slow part where the water bends warm.....A walk to the berry patch on the south side....A small lunch on the flat stone....Maybe a contest or two,...with Zippy keeping score.
But the morning they woke up to...was not that day....The leaves were wet.....The flat stone was wet.....The berry patch was wet.....The creek was muddy where it usually runs clear....And the sky,...all the way across,...was the colour of an old grey coat.
And down at the soft place by the path —...where the dirt goes dark when the rain comes —...something the friends would normally not notice...was happening....The worms,...little quiet creatures who live under the meadow,...had come up to the surface....Because the rain had filled their tunnels with water,...and they had to.....And they were everywhere,...slow and pink and patient,...just sitting in the wet earth...and breathing the soft grey air.
Now, this is where things got interesting...
And the first one out into the rain that morning,...slow as ever,...wearing the wet on her shell like she'd been waiting for it,...was Shelly the tortoise....And she was looking down at the soft place where the worms had come up,...and she said,
...Mm....The worms are out.....Hello, worms.
And then — from under the big-leaf maple, where he had been waiting for the rain to maybe stop — hopped Bongo the bear cub,...damp,...disappointed,...slightly less bouncy than usual....He looked up at the grey sky,...and his ears went a little flat,...and he said,
[excited]...Friends....Friends, the day....The day, friends....I had this WHOLE DAY in my HEAD....And the day in my HEAD...had SUN in it....And it had BERRIES....And it had SWIMMING....And the day that ACTUALLY HAPPENED...has — has — it has RAIN....And I don't know what to do with rain.
And just behind him — because the rain made her wings a little slower, but not by much — darted Zippy the hummingbird,...with a leaf she was using as a tiny umbrella,...which was not, all things considered, working....And she said,
Okay — okay....Friends — I have done the math — I have done a LOT of math this morning — rainfall is approximately one-point-four leaf-millimetres per minute — which means the swim is COMPROMISED — the berry expedition is COMPROMISED — the flat stone is — the flat stone is also COMPROMISED — friends — the day, mathematically, is COMPROMISED.
And from up high in the dripping branches of the big old oak —...because where else would he be — came Garingo the parrot,...with feathers slightly less spectacular than usual,...because feathers do not love rain,...and he called down — from beneath, by his own arrangement, the driest leaf he could find —
BEHOLD!...The day....The day that WAS to be — ample,...sunlit,...berry-laden,...and TRIUMPHANTLY DRY —...is, this morning,...quite spectacularly...wet.
And at the edge of the meadow,...quiet and steady, in her now-familiar register,...with rain beading on her back and not bothering her at all,...was Fern the fawn....She had come out into the rain too....She did not say so first.
...Hello, friends....The rain is gentle today.
[excited]...Fern....It's a GREY day, Fern....It's — it's the GREY one....We were going to SWIM, Fern.
...A SWIM, Bongo....A swim....In the SLOW PART of the creek,...where the water bends WARM.....I had — if I may — been LOOKING FORWARD,...from up high,...with a connoisseur's anticipation,...to the EVENT.
Friends — I have done a RAPID RECALCULATION — if the rain falls at one-point-four leaf-millimetres per minute — and the creek takes on, conservatively, FOUR HUNDRED leaf-millimetres of inflow per hour — then the swim spot will not be warm again until — friends — until tomorrow afternoon at the EARLIEST — the day is — the day is FIRMLY rescheduled —
...Friends.....Come look at the worms.
[excited]...The — the worms?...Shelly....The worms?
...Mm....They came up in the rain....They're out.....They're not having a bad morning.
...They're not....They're — they're just out.....Like the rain is their morning.
...Worms....I — I have OBSERVED them, of course....From up here....Small, pink, civic creatures....I had not...considered...the possibility...that the WORMS were having a GOOD morning....while WE were having a CANCELLED one.
[excited]...Wait....Friends — wait — the WORMS are out — the worms come out because their tunnels FLOOD — which means — the rain is the worms' — the rain is the worms' SWIM SPOT — I — I did NOT have that in the algorithm.
Now....The friends were still standing in the rain....And the rain was still falling....And the day they had been planning...was still not happening.
...Friends.....I'm — I'm going to tell you something.....I wanted that day too.....The swim and the berries.....I'd been thinking about it all week.....And I knew....When I woke up.....And I heard the rain.....And I came out....I knew the day wasn't going to be that day.
...And then I looked down....At the worms.....And I thought....They didn't pick this day either.....They came up because they had to.....And they're just... here.
[excited]...Shelly....I — I'm sad....I am, Shelly....I really wanted the day in my head....I think I was — I think I was holding it really tight.
...Me too....I had a small thing.....A small thing I wanted....And it didn't happen either.
Mm.....Yes....Of course you did, my friends.....Of course you all did.....The day in your heads...was a fine day.....And the day in front of you....is a different one.
Shelly....What do you see...in the day God gave us?
...Mm.....I see....the worms.....I see Fern's back, with the rain on it.....I see the frog over there, holding court under a leaf.....I see… a small wet world that has not stopped being a world.....I see the day God gave us......Maybe God knew this day...had things in it...we hadn't seen yet.
Mm.
And there's a small letter,...a long way away,...that I have been thinking of all morning....From a man named Paul,...who once wrote to his friends in a place called Thessalonica,...about giving thanks....A line of it has been with me as I've been listening to you....But — I'll come back to that line later.
...Friends.....I'm going to walk.....Down the puddle path.....I think...there might be more.
[excited]...Shelly....The — the puddle path?...In the RAIN?
...Mm.....Slowly.....You won't melt.
And so the friends followed Shelly,...slow on the wet path,...past where the worms had come up,...past where the leaves were drinking from cupped centres,...past a small low place where the rain had made a fresh small pond —...and the air smelled the way air smells...when wet earth has just had a long quiet drink.
...There's a frog....Under the maple-leaf.....He's — he's singing.
...A frog.....Under a maple-leaf.....In the rain.....Performing,...as it were,...a kind of...wet,...one-frog concerto.
[excited]...Friends — wait — if the frog is singing in the rain — and the worms are out — and the leaves are drinking — then the rain — the rain is the WORMS' morning — and the frog's song — and the leaves' drink — and we're WALKING in it —
[excited]...Friends.....I want to say something....And I am going to say it...slowly.....I think...I think we get the day we get....And...the day we get...can still be a good day....Even if it's not the day we WANTED....I — I think that's a thing.
...Bongo.....That's....exactly the thing.
...Mm.....A small wet day.....A whole one, anyway.
Mm.....And the day,...as it turned out,...had quite a lot in it.....We watched the frog finish his small concert.....We watched a beetle climb a wet stem and stop, considering.....We sat under the big oak — the dry side —...and Bongo found a piece of bark shaped exactly like a snail....And Zippy started a new algorithm she called 'rain-day-rating'....And Garingo recited,...from his slightly-damp branch,...a poem about leaves, that he had not previously written, and was making up as he went....And Shelly...looked at the worms once more,...as if to say thank you.
Now....After all of that —...once the rain had thinned a little,...but not stopped —...we sat together on the dry side of the big oak,...where the leaves go thickest,...and looked out at the wet meadow,...and the slow puddles,...and the very small lights where raindrops met the surface.
And I asked them — friends, what do you think it was, in the end,...that made the day good?
[excited]...I think.....I think it was that...we walked into it....Instead of waiting for it to stop......I think....God can still make a day good.....Even when it isn't the one we wanted.
...I think....it was the worms....And the frog.....And that the morning...was already happening....without us being sad about it....So we... joined it.
[excited]...I think....it was the algorithm....I think.....The rain-day-rating algorithm.....It is.....it is currently rating today....at...nine-point-two out of ten.....For an unplanned wet day.....Which is..higher.....than I expected.....by a LOT.
...I think.....it was that...the WORMS....were already there...before we were....And so was the rain....And so was the frog.....And we joined a morning....that was already happening....without us.
...Mm.....Thanks....is what you say...when you didn't pick the day....but you stayed in it.
Mm.....That's it, my friends.....Thanks goes to God.....That's it exactly.
Now, before you go —...Professor Hoot — he has, of course, something he very much wants to tell you....About rain....The dear earnest creature.
...Ahem....Ahem ahem....Children...gather round....Today, a fact known to be...unequivocally....true.
Today's...topic....RAIN.
Rain,...children,...is what happens when the SKY...becomes...too HEAVY....The sky carries, you see, a great deal of WATER....And every so often,...the SKY has to PUT THE WATER DOWN.....And THAT,...children,...is rain.
Now....A FASCINATING FACT....For my attentive young listeners....Did you know...that...rain has...a SMELL....The smell of rain on warm ground...is called petrichor....PE-TRI-COR.....It is one of the finest words.....I will not...elaborate.
Now....Rain....is also.....in fact.....you may not know this....A thing the WORMS very much enjoy.....The WORMS — children — come UP to the surface...when the rain falls....They like it....The worms,...you might say,...have a RAIN DAY.
Now....I had....I had a further fact prepared.....It was...it was about clouds....And specifically...about...about...children, I'm afraid...the fact has gone....I had it just now....It was, I am certain,...an EXCELLENT fact....But it has...departed.
...Ahem.....Children,...perhaps....the BEST fact about rain....is the one I just said.....The worms,...having their day....while WE,...the dry creatures,...are inside,...wondering if our day is ruined.....Whereas the WORMS....were not wondering....at all.....They were just....having rain.
Ahem.....I — I appear....to have said....another true thing.....Class dismissed.
...Mm.....Well....The dear earnest creature....He got there, in his way.....The worms were having rain.....That's actually rather fine....I'll take it.
Old Timber —...what did we learn today?
Mm....When Shelly looked down at the worms in the rain...and saw them being just here...that's where the day turned....Thanking God in the day you got...is what Shelly found this morning.
And there's a line from the Bible, my friends....From a small letter that a man named Paul wrote,...a long time ago,...to his friends in a place called Thessalonica....The line says —...In every thing give thanks: for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus concerning you.
And that's what the friends did this morning....The day they planned didn't happen....But the day that did happen...had worms in it,...and a frog,...and leaves drinking the rain,...and one tortoise who knew where to look first.....And nobody felt smaller for the day they got....Because they gave thanks to God for it...by walking into it.
[excited]...Old Timber?...What does that LOOK like?...In an actual day?...For somebody who is listening right now?
Mm....Well, friend,...this week,...if your day doesn't go the way you wanted —...if the swim is cancelled,...or the trip got moved,...or the friend you wanted to see was busy —...try saying thank you to God for ONE small thing in the day you actually got.....Just one.....The smell of toast.....The dog at your feet.....The window with rain on it.....Try saying it out loud....See what it does to the day.
Until the next breeze brings us together, my friends....Thank God for the day you got out there, little ones.
See you next time... somewhere in Shiloh Creek.